Demand management for Supply Chain Demand Management by Anaplan provides the capabilities required for sales, marketing and supply chain planners to deliver a consensus demand plan. It is the first step in your journey to manage supply chain costs and maximize customer service. With many stakeholders, solution design requires collaborative processes to support the ability to predict, shape, and sense demand by using flexible models and calculations. Leverage Excel®, web, and mobile front-ends tailored to sales, marketing, and other functions, and use consensus-building rules to drive a more accurate demand plan. There’s a better way to plan Increase forecast accuracy and reduce bias Achieve consensus and align to financial goals Leverage statistical rigor and track accuracy Collect stakeholder forecasts at any level. of forecast value-adds from stakeholders. Define consensus-building rules leveraging Incorporate internal and external market data, inputs from customers and internal departments. and other leading indicators of demand. Integrate demand plans with legacy systems Utilize machine learning with PlanIQ™ with pre-built connectors and APIs. for better demand predictions. Optimize new product and promotion plans Plan new products with curve-fit modeling and scenarios, and based on like products. Collaborate on new products to align launch plan and pricing with sales and marketing. Model and integrate promotions directly into your plans. BENEFITS • Improve accuracy of regular-turn, new products, promotions, and intermittent products with intuitive modeling and automated forecasting methods. • Leverage AI/ML with Anaplan Plan IQ to generate accurate forecasts, fast. • Segment products and predict forecast with adjustable rules and pick-best statistical algorithms. • Understand forecast changes and drivers of change with forecast analytics. • Collaborate faster and more easily across departments and customers with an optimized user experience and flexible modeling. • Integrate with legacy systems using pre-built connectors and APIs, including ERP, CRM, and planning systems. Leverage external data integration available in-house or with cloud database systems using Cloudworks.

Key Features and Capabilities Multi-dimensional demand modeling Improve productivity: Consensus demand planning Top-down and bottom-up forecasting. Flexible time Reporting, dashboarding, and alerting buckets, units, and currencies for operational and Zero-latency reports and dashboards for all Easy-to-use planning views are tailored to and by the business, including sales and marketing, financial planning. demand plans, forecast KPIs, and actuals with web, via web, mobile, or Excel®. Define consensus-building mobile, Excel®, and PowerPoint® front-ends. rules based on input accuracy and time horizons Interactive statistical forecasting Enable highly interactive reporting and analysis on the aligned with your process. Leverage aggregation, Leverage out-of-box statistical forecasting same view as for planning and updating master data. disaggregation, allocation, and cell locking. methods, including methods for seasonality and Leverage any alert on all data, including plan and Use the same secure, easy-to-access cloud solution intermittent demand, and multi-linear regression. master data changes. Record qualitative notes, for collaboration across departments and with Forecast quantity, price, attach rates, and discounts. plan changes, and assumptions. business partners. Change-history tracking of all plan updates facilitates auditability and collaboration. Enable demand planners to tailor these methods. Evaluate multiple demand scenarios. Leverage machine learning Leverage native machine learning (PlanIQ™ powered by Amazon Forecast), use R/Python or Custom ML side-car integration to enhance the forecast. Leverage public cloud ML forecasts. Leverage internal and external influencing factors to correlate the forecast. Segmentation analysis Flexibly define product, customer, region segments, and forecast for distinct segments, to improve accuracy. Analyze each segment to provide differentiated service. Product lifecycle and promotion planning Plan new and phase-out products with like-modeling, Data integration curve-fit modeling, and cannibalization models. Use Model Link to share plans and master data Allow planners to create specialized models across models without ETL tools. Get started quickly without outside experts. Create promotions with self-service UI for data loads (import and export) and detailed plans, including financials. by business and IT users. Centralization of master Workflow Model your process and track completion and data and transaction data from source systems to multiple Anaplan apps. Pre-defined, bidirectional Anaplan connectors with MuleSoft, SnapLogic, approval of forecast updates. Send email notifications. and Boomi for hundreds of data sources, including Archive plans of record. Automate routine steps for demand planning or data preparation. Oracle and SAP, and Cloud databases e.g. Amazon S3 (via Anaplan CloudWorks™). Leverage UI integration with Salesforce to include sales in your process. Programmatic integration via REST-API. About Anaplan Anaplan is the only scenario planning and analysis platform designed to optimize decision-making in today’s complex business environment so that enterprises can outpace their competition and the market. By building connections and collaboration across organizational silos, our platform intelligently surfaces key insights — so businesses can make the right decisions, right now. More than 2,400 of the world’s best brands continually optimize their decision-making by planning with Anaplan. To learn more, visit www.anaplan.com