Sales and Operations Planning | Oracle Skip to content Accessibility Policy Products Industries Resources Customers Partners Developers Company Close Search Search Oracle.com QUICK LINKS Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Oracle Fusion Cloud Applications Oracle AI Database Download Java Careers at Oracle Search Country View Accounts Back Cloud Account Sign in to Cloud Sign Up for Free Cloud Tier Oracle Account Sign-In Create an Account Help Sign Out Contact Sales Menu Menu Overview SCM Products Supply Chain Planning Inventory Management Manufacturing Maintenance Order Management Logistics Product Lifecycle Management Procurement SCM Analytics SCM for Industries Automotive Communications Consumer Goods Federal Government Healthcare High Tech Life Sciences Industrial Manufacturing Oil and Gas Restaurants Retail Travel and Transportation Wholesale Distribution What's New Oracle AI for SCM Why choose Oracle AI for SCM over SAP, Workday, Kinaxis, RELEX, Palantir, and Blue Yonder? Smart Operations Accelerate Product Innovation and Go-to-Market Clinically Integrated Supply Chain Compare Oracle Cloud SCM for Healthcare to Workday Business Insights Applications Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Planning Oracle Sales and Operations Planning Continuously adjust operating plans to meet company objectives and align execution across the enterprise with sales and operations planning (S&OP). Enable a continuous S&OP process. Take a tour Oracle Fusion Cloud Sales and Operations Planning Meet revenue goals Align business objectives Make better, more informed decisions Achieve your long-term revenue goals with sales and operations planning Connect strategy and operations Execute a continuous, forward-looking S&OP process that connects strategy and operations. Develop the best plans by quickly balancing demand and supply alternatives using best practices. Drive consensus S&OP from your teams Synchronize finance and material planning goals and evaluate scenarios to settle on an optimal sales and operations plan. Monitor and resolve problems Identify S&OP issues and resolve them with a guided, step-by-step approach. Leverage social tools to provide insights for effective collaboration. View the Sales and Operations Planning datasheet (PDF) Gain consensus S&OP and bridge the gap between planning and execution Plan aggregate capacity with financial objectives Make long-term, strategic decisions that optimize resource planning and usage. Analyze performance and identify exceptions Monitor your actual performance versus targets with best practice charts and graphs that graphically display results. Drill down into details to get the root cause of problems and take corrective action. Simulate alternative scenarios Evaluate multiple what-if scenarios with in-line simulation to support plan decisions. See the impact of changes to a wide range of supply chain parameters, such as capacity, lead times, or bill of resources. Connect S&OP with execution Link your sales and operations planning to sales and operations execution (S&OE) to effectively implement plans across the enterprise and your supply chain network. Link S&OP decisions with overall business planning Monitor and manage the health of your product portfolio Use proven best practices to manage your product portfolio through the entire product lifecycle, with full visibility from launch to the end of useful life. Leverage built-in best practices in your sales and operations planning process Manage sales and operations planning with commonly understood and widely deployed S&OP process templates. Drive collaboration with your employees and trading partners Take advantage of integrated supply chain collaboration capabilities to accelerate understanding and agreement globally. Oracle orchestrates its multibillion-dollar supply chain operations using Oracle Sales and Operations Planning Read the Oracle story Oracle Sales and Operations Planning use cases Integrated business planning Align end-to-end planning with a unified data model and advanced analytics to speed decision-making and the planning process. Sales and Operations Planning (5:24) Enable continuous planning Balance demand and supply using rapid what-if simulations, reduce decision latency, and improve profitability and customer service. Datasheet: Oracle Sales and Operations Planning (PDF) Improve sales and operations planning with embedded analytics Improve planning speed and accuracy with predictions and recommendations from advanced technologies such as the Internet of Things and machine learning. How Titan International became a smart, connected manufacturer (2:02) Oracle Sales and Operations Planning Product Tour Integrate business planning and execution Oracle Fusion Cloud Sales and Operations Planning drives continuous, forward-looking business planning. By aligning product, demand, supply, workforce, and sales plans with financial goals from Oracle Fusion Cloud Enterprise Performance Management (EPM). It provides targeted guidance at every stage. Orchestrate efficient process management Facilitate product, demand, supply, financial, and executive reviews with real-time performance visualizations. For example, product managers can easily evaluate new product introductions to align their business plans. Use built-in templates Facilitate product, demand, supply, financial, and executive reviews with real-time performance visualizations. For example, product managers can easily evaluate new product introductions to align their business plans. Monitor product lifecycle phases Use Product Review to assess the planned impact of new and existing products. Harmonize forecasts across the portfolio and proactively manage inventory obsolescence for items that are being phased out. Weigh demand trade-offs Use Demand Review to compare the operational forecast with updated financial, sales, and marketing forecasts from Oracle EPM and other sources. Analyze product forecasts to build stakeholder consensus on the future demand plan, which Oracle Fusion Cloud Demand Management and Oracle Fusion Cloud Supply Planning can leverage for tactical planning. Review supply feasibility Use Supply Review to analyze supply constraints that could impact your ability to meet demand. Simulate revenue at risk from changes and develop contingency plans to address supply limitations. Leverage your resources Supply Review also evaluates resource use, identifying spare capacity and bottlenecks. Bills of resources highlight critical resources and components to speed up your strategic capacity and manpower simulations. Adapt to changing business conditions Collaborate with stakeholders to create alternative S&OP plans that address shifts in demand, costs, resources, and capacity, as well as other potential disruptions. Assess the pros and cons of the new plans versus your baseline. Simulate financial impact of capacity changes Easily evaluate new capacity investments based on projected revenue, margin, and profit improvement Identify the best way forward for your business By unifying strategic, financial, and operational plans, Oracle Sales and Operational Planning aligns execution with key enterprise goals such as growth and profitability. It delivers clear insights for effective collaboration, cost optimization, and market expansion. With this tool, you can easily compare plans and gain consensus on the best option. May 9, 2022 Moving your supply chain planning to the cloud? Consider these 5 key areas Daniel Bachar, Director of Product Marketing, Oracle Organizations are taking big steps ahead of their competitors, investing in new supply chain planning solutions to help them improve their operations and processes. Moving supply chain planning to the cloud is a shift that every organization is either thinking about, or already doing. No matter how synchronized your supply chain planning is on-premises, having your supply chain planning solution in the cloud will provide many new benefits. Read the full article Featured blogs View all Sales and operations planning resources Cloud readiness Documentation Customer community Support and services Learn what's new in the latest Sales and Operations Planning software release Review readiness material to learn what's new in your Cloud S&OP service and plan for quarterly updates. Get the latest Sales and Operations Planning updates Access a library of documentation Oracle Help Center provides detailed information about our products and services with targeted solutions, getting started guides, and content for advanced use cases. Get started with Oracle Sales and Operations Planning Join a community of your peers Cloud Customer Connect is Oracle's premier online cloud community. With more than 200,000 members, it's designed to promote peer-to-peer collaboration and sharing of best practices, product updates, and feedback. Join today Support My Oracle Support Support Policies and Practices Customer Success Services Services Soar to Cloud Migration Services Consulting Find a Partner Related Sales and Operations Planning products Supply chain planning (SCP) Improve resilience and outpace change See supply chain planning Demand management Simplify demand planning See demand management Supply planning Improve operational efficiency See supply planning Supply chain collaboration Automate business-to-business practices with trading partners See supply chain collaboration Get started with Oracle Sales and Operations Planning S&OP live demo Take a walkthrough with one of our supply chain planning experts. Get live demo S&OP product tour Take a tour of Oracle’s Sales and Operations Planning and explore our supply chain planning products. Browse tours Contact SCM sales Talk to a team member about Sales and Operations Planning. Contact us Resources for Careers Developers Investors Partners Researchers Students and Educators Why Oracle Analyst Reports Best cloud-based ERP Cloud Economics Social Impact Security Practices Learn What is a sovereign cloud? What is zero trust security? How AI is transforming finance What is a vector database? What is multicloud? What are AI agents? News and Events News Oracle AI World Oracle Health Summit JavaOne Search all events Contact Us US Sales: +1.800.633.0738 How can we help? Subscribe to emails Integrity Helpline Accessibility Country/Region &copy; 2026 Oracle Privacy / Do Not Sell My Info Ad Choices Careers