Watch: The Five &#39;Cs&#39; of the Parcel Business | SupplyChainBrain Advertise Contact Us Supplier Directory SCB YouTube About Us Login Subscribe Logout My Profile Label LOGISTICS Air Cargo All Logistics Facility Location Planning Freight Forwarding/Customs Brokerage Global Gateways Global Logistics Last Mile Delivery Logistics Outsourcing LTL/Truckload Services Ocean Transportation Parcel &amp; Express Rail &amp; Intermodal Reverse Logistics Service Parts Management Transportation &amp; Distribution TECHNOLOGY All Technology Artificial Intelligence Cloud &amp; On-Demand Systems Data Management (Big Data/IoT/Blockchain) ERP &amp; Enterprise Systems Forecasting &amp; Demand Planning Global Trade Management Inventory Planning/ Optimization Product Lifecycle Management Robotics Sales &amp; Operations Planning SC Finance &amp; Revenue Management SC Planning &amp; Optimization Supply Chain Visibility Transportation Management GENERAL SCM Business Strategy Alignment Customer Relationship Management Education &amp; Professional Development Global Supply Chain Management Global Trade &amp; Economics Green Energy HR &amp; Labor Management Quality &amp; Metrics Regulation &amp; Compliance Sourcing/Procurement/SRM SC Security &amp; Risk Mgmt Supply Chains in Crisis Sustainability &amp; Corporate Social Responsibility WAREHOUSING All Warehouse Services Conveyors &amp; Sortation Lift Trucks &amp; AGVs Order Management &amp; Fulfillment Packaging RFID, Barcode, Mobility &amp; Voice Warehouse Automation Warehouse Management Systems INDUSTRIES Aerospace &amp; Defense Apparel Automotive Chemicals &amp; Energy Consumer Packaged Goods E-Commerce/Omni-Channel Food &amp; Beverage Healthcare High-Tech/Electronics Industrial Manufacturing Pharmaceutical/Biotech Retail THINK TANK WEBINARS On-Demand Webinars Upcoming Webinars Webinar Library PODCASTS WHITEPAPERS VIDEOS Home &raquo; Watch: The Five 'Cs' of the Parcel Business VIDEO Watch: The Five &#39;Cs&#39; of the Parcel Business January 4, 2023 Jason Smith, relationship manager with U.S. Bank , lists the "Five Cs" of the parcel business, and tells which one is the most important to carriers today. The “Five Cs” of the parcel business are customers, carriers, consistency, capacity and cost, Smith says. But it’s that last element — cost — that takes precedence for many shippers and carriers today. “In the post-pandemic environment, the cost of everything has gone up,” he says, “and the logistics industry is not immune to that. Carriers have to pay drivers more, and buy trucks that are more expensive.” Those additional expenses are passed on to the shipper in the form of higher freight rates, even as many e-tailers still offer pricey free shipping as a means of attracting fickle shoppers. Prior to the pandemic, parcel companies and retailers placed more emphasis on heightening the customer experience. And they still give lip service to that metric. But in a time of rising inflation and uncertain economy, it gives way to practical considerations of the bottom line. That said, e-commerce customers are more demanding than ever about getting good service and timely delivery of their orders. Many won’t do business again with a retailer that fails to live up to expectations. Balancing promises to customers with cost control becomes the “secret sauce” for retailers’ success. Smith says there are things retailers can do to achieve that balance, or at least approach it. Part of the answer lies in accurate forecasting of demand through data modeling. Retailers need to be able to tell carriers how much business they expect to do, and the capacity they need to fulfill it. “Carriers appreciate that transparency,” Smith says. “It enhances the relationship, gives the shipper more negotiating power, and increases the willingness of carriers to adjust freight rates.” RELATED CONTENT RELATED VIDEOS Last Mile Delivery Parcel &amp; Express Consumer Packaged Goods E-Commerce/Omni-Channel Related Articles Watch: Understanding the True Cost of Parcel Services Watch: The Benefits of a Multi-Carrier Strategy for Parcel Shippers Related Directories Tecsys, Inc. Subscribe to our Daily Newsletter! Timely, incisive articles delivered directly to your inbox. Featured Product Popular Stories Watch: Ball of Confusion? Figuring Out AI in Supply Chain Planning Artificial Intelligence Watch: Who Will Be the ‘Planner of the Future’? Data Management (Big Data/IoT/Blockchain) Case Study: A Tale of Two AI-Driven Procurement Transformations Artificial Intelligence How Physical AI Will Reshape the Warehouse Artificial Intelligence VW May Pull Plans for U.S. Audi Plant Absent Tariff Cuts, CEO Says Global Trade &amp; Economics Digital Edition Supply Chain Innovation 2025: On the Rocky Road to Resilience VIEW THE LATEST ISSUE Case Studies Recycled Tagging Fasteners: Small Changes Make a Big Impact Enhancing High-Value Electronics Shipment Security with Tive's Real-Time Tracking Moving Robots Site-to-Site JLL Finds Perfect Warehouse Location, Leading to $15M Grant for Startup Robots Speed Fulfillment to Help Apparel Company Scale for Growth Visit Our Sponsors More From SCB Featured Content Video Library Think Tank Blog SupplyChainBrain Podcast Whitepapers On-Demand Webinars Upcoming Webinars Digital Offerings Digital Issue Subscribe Manage Email Preferences Newsletters Resources Events Calendar 2026 Event Coverage SCB&#39;s Great Supply Chain Partners Supplier Directory Case Study Showcase Supply Chain Innovation Awards 100 Great Partners Form SCB Corporate Advertise on SCB.COM About Us Privacy Policy Contact Us Data Sharing Opt-Out All content copyright ©2026 Keller International Publishing Corp All rights reserved. No reproduction, transmission or display is permitted without the written permissions of Keller International Publishing Corp Design, CMS, Hosting &amp; Web Development :: ePublishing