Think Topics | IBM Home Think Topics Explainers Become an expert on emerging and fundamental tech topics Featured topics Demystify transformative technologies. Decode tech topics with content crafted by IBM experts. What is data mining? Learn how data mining combines statistics and artificial intelligence to analyze large datasets to discover meaningful insights and useful information. What is a vector database? Use a vector database for storing, managing and indexing huge quantities of high-dimensional vector data efficiently for generative AI use cases and applications. What is a chatbot? Explore chatbot technology to understand how chatbots simulate human conversation, often relying on NLP to parse inputs and generative AI to automate responses. What is a DDoS (distributed denial of service) attack? Find out how a DDoS attack floods websites and other network resources with malicious traffic, disrupting normal activity and denying access to legitimate users. What is phishing? Uncover and understand how phishing tricks users into divulging sensitive data, downloading malware and making themselves or their organizations vulnerable to cybercrime. What is quantum computing? Study the basics to learn how this technology uses quantum mechanics to solve complex problems beyond classical computers’ capabilities and explore the potential impact it can have across many industries. AI and machine learning View all AI topics What is artificial intelligence? Understand how AI enables computers to think and decide like humans, explore its history and the types of AI and uncover the ways it impacts our lives. What is machine learning? Gain insight into how ML uses data and algorithms, its use cases and associated concerns to empower responsible and innovative use of the technology. What is deep learning? Discover how deep learning simulates our brain, helping systems learn to identify and undertake complex tasks with increasing accuracy unsupervised. What is the k-nearest neighbors algorithm? Learn about the k-nearest neighbors algorithm, one of the popular and simplest classification and regression classifiers used in machine learning today. What is natural language processing (NLP)? Dive into how NLP enables machines to understand and respond to text or voice data and learn about various NLP tasks to obtain optimal results. What are neural networks? Learn how neural networks allow programs to recognize patterns and solve common problems in artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning. Analytics View all analytics topics What is business intelligence? Know how to harness business data by understanding how business intelligence processes data to gain actionable insights and inform decision-making. What is linear regression? Master this analytics procedure to become skilled at generating predictions, by using an easily interpreted mathematical formula and applying it to various domains. What is logistic regression? Predict outcomes more quickly and make better decisions by gaining expertise in the logistic regression method and by knowing which type of logistic regression to use. What is Monte Carlo simulation? Learn how to run a Monte Carlo Simulation, a computational algorithm, by using repeated random sampling to estimate the possible outcomes of an uncertain event. What is exploratory data analysis? Know about exploratory data analysis to effectively analyze and summarize datasets, helping one to discover patterns and anomalies and generate a hypothesis. What is data science? Use data science to unlock business insights from an increasing amount of data, accelerate digital transformation and data-driven decision making. Asset management View all asset management topics What is visual inspection? Master visual inspection of equipment to detect defects both in person and remotely by examining digital images to maintain quality and safety standards. What is preventive maintenance? Implement preventive maintenance by combining regular maintenance tasks with ML, data analytics and predictive asset health monitoring to prevent downtime. What is a CMMS? Enhance maintenance efforts with a computerized maintenance management system (CMMS) for efficient scheduling, managing and tracking of maintenance tasks. What is a digital twin? Explore how digital twins create a virtual copy of an object or system by integrating real-time data, simulation, ML and reasoning to support decision-making. What is field service management? Learn field service management to effectively coordinate resources, employees and equipment, in work activities and operations off company property. Business operations View all business automation topics What is business automation? Explore what business automation is, why it matters and how you can put it to work for your organization. What is intelligent automation? Find out how intelligent automation combines AI and automation technologies, enabling automation of low-level tasks within your business. What is business process management (BPM)? Find out how BPM uses various methods to discover, model, analyze, measure, improve and optimize business strategy and processes. What is process mining? Learn how process mining applies specialized algorithms to event log data to identify trends, patterns and details of how a process unfolds. What is a workflow? Learn how workflows can help you manage repetitive processes and tasks, which occur in a particular order. What is Industry 4.0? Use digital transformation with Industry 4.0, delivering real-time decision making, enhanced productivity, flexibility and agility. What is interactive voice response (IVR)? Learn about automating customer interactions with IVR, enabling callers to get or provide information or make voice requests without speaking to a live agent. Business operations View all business operations topics What is the Internet of Things (IoT)? Learn about IoT, which is a network of physical objects that are embedded with sensors, software and network connectivity, allowing them to collect and share data. What is software development? Create, design, deploy and support software through software development, covering a set of computer science activities. What is supply chain management? Use supply chain management (SCM) to coordinate a business’ entire production flow, from sourcing materials to delivering an item. What is inventory management? Track inventory from manufacturers to warehouses and from these facilities to point of sale through effective inventory management. What is SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act) compliance? Review compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act for financial reporting and transparency to prevent corporate fraud. What is GRC (governance, risk and compliance)? Manage governance and risks while maintaining compliance with industry and government regulations by implementing GRC strategies. Cloud View all cloud topics What is cloud computing? Learn how cloud computing lets you use infrastructure and applications online, without installing and maintaining them on premises. What is cloud security? Defend your organization with cloud security, leveraging procedures and technologies designed to address external and internal threats. What is virtualization? Use virtualization to maximize hardware efficiency to divide a single computer’s hardware resources into multiple virtual machines. What are IaaS, PaaS and SaaS? Learn about the three most popular types of cloud service offerings: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS, also known as cloud service models or cloud computing service models. What is cloud storage? Save data and files in an off-site location with cloud storage, accessible through public internet or a dedicated private network connection. What is a hybrid cloud? Use hybrid cloud to combine and unify on-premises, private cloud and public cloud environments to create a single, flexible IT infrastructure. What is a private cloud? Create an environment dedicated exclusively to a single customer with private cloud, offering cloud benefits along with on-premises security. Compute and servers View all compute topics What is high-performance computing (HPC)? Find out how HPC uses powerful processors to process massive amounts of data and solve today’s most complex computing problems in real time or near-real time. What is SaaS—software-as-a-service? Understand how SaaS works as a software delivery model to reap the benefits like cloud computing, cost savings, scalability and accessibility through a web browser. What is cloud computing? Learn how cloud computing enables access to intranet-based infrastructure and applications, eliminating onsite maintenance and enhancing agility and efficiency. What is Kubernetes? Learn Kubernetes—an open source container orchestration platform—to manage and scale containerized applications, improve availability and reduce costs. What is serverless? Explore what developers and IT leaders like about serverless computing, a simpler way to build and run cloud-native applications, paying only for what you use. What is a mainframe? Learn how mainframes are able to process billions of calculations and transactions daily in real-time, with the highest levels of security and reliability. Databases View all database topics What are NoSQL databases? Discover how NoSQL, also referred to as “non-SQL”, enables the storage and querying of data outside the traditional structures found in relational databases. What is the CAP theorem? Look into the CAP theorem that states a system can deliver two of three key characteristics: consistency, availability and partition tolerance. What is a database schema? Find out how database schema creates definition and organization of data within a relational database and how it maintains data quality and integrity. What is etcd? Learn more about etcd, the fault-tolerant open source key-value database that serves as the primary data backbone for Kubernetes and other distributed platform. What is a relational database? Use a relational database, which provides a structured way to organize data in rows and columns that form a table, maintaining data consistency and integrity. DevOps View all DevOps topics What is DevOps? Learn how DevOps combines and automates software tasks to speed the delivery of high-quality software and its synergy with site reliability engineering (SRE). What is DevSecOps? Automate the integration of security at every phase of the software development lifecycle, with DevSecOps, short for development, security and operations. What is software development? See how software is developed and how it can help your business compete. Discover software development essentials, innovations and technologies. What is software testing? Find software errors and verify that an application or system is fit for use, preventing bugs, reducing development costs and improving performance. What is Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)? Find out how PaaS, or Platform-as-a-Service, provides a complete, flexible and cost-effective cloud platform for developing, running and managing applications. What is site reliability engineering (SRE)? Automate IT operations tasks that would otherwise be performed manually, accelerate software delivery, and minimize IT risk with site reliability engineering. IT automation View all IT automation topics What is an API (application programming interface)? Enable data exchange through APIs, which define rules or protocols for communication between applications. What is AIOps? Optimize IT operations with AIOps, through the integration of analytics, artificial intelligence and other technologies to boost efficiency. What is software testing? Evaluate and verify software or application performance through rigorous software testing. What is site reliability engineering (SRE)? Use operations data and software engineering to automate IT operations tasks, accelerate software delivery and minimize IT risk with SRE. What is observability? Gain deep visibility into modern distributed applications with observability, enabling faster, automated problem identification and resolution. What is DevSecOps? Automate the integration of security practices with DevSecOps, enhancing security at every phase of the software development lifecycle. What is IT automation? Examine how IT automation implements automated processes and software in place of time-consuming manual activities. What is cloud automation? Explore how cloud automation implements tools and processes that reduce or eliminate the manual work of cloud provisioning, configuration and management. IT infrastructure View all IT infrastructure topics What is computer networking? Connect two or more computing devices through computer networking, enabling the transmission and exchange of information and resources. What is a mainframe? Explore what mainframes are, what are their benefits and how do they process billions of calculations and transactions in real time, securely and reliably. What is a data center? Explore what a data center is, and how you can centralize IT infrastructure in a data center, housing applications and services in a secure way. Hard disk drive (HDD) versus solid-state drive (SSD): What’s the difference? Learn about the differences between hard disk drives (HDDs) and solid-state drives (SDDs), and how these differences affect data access speed, performance and cost. What is a microprocessor? Power your devices with microprocessors, combining the components and function of a CPU into a single integrated circuit (IC), or a few connected Ics. What is virtualization? Use virtualization to maximize hardware efficiency to divide a single computer’s hardware resources unto multiple virtual machines. What is a cloud server? Build your cloud infrastructure with cloud servers, which are the fundamental building blocks of cloud computing infrastructure. What is Terraform? Explore how Terraform, an open source “Infrastructure as code” tool, allows programmers to build, change and version infrastructure safely and efficiently. What is IT infrastructure? Build a strong IT infrastructure, combining components needed for the operation and management of enterprise IT services and IT environments. Middleware View all middleware topics What is middleware? Learn how middleware speeds development of distributed applications by simplifying connectivity between applications, components and backend data sourcesS. What are microservices? See how microservices architecture breaks down a monolithic application into smaller deployable services, enabling agility and scalability. What is mobile application development? Gain an introductory understanding of mobile application development, which involves making software for smartphones, tablets and digital assistants. What is Java™ Spring Boot? Learn how Java Spring Boot simplifies the development of web applications and microservices with an open source framework referred to as the Java Spring Framework. What is three-tier architecture? Separate applications into three logical and physical computing tiers, making it easy to maintain and scale each tier as needed without impacting the other tiers. Network View all network topics What is network security? Use network security solutions to protect network infrastructure, resources and traffic from internal and external security threats and cyberattacks. What is load balancing? Understand how to distribute network traffic efficiently among servers to optimize application availability and maintain a positive end-user experience. What is a network operations center? Explore the ways network operations centers help organizations maintain optimal performance and how AI plays a role in delivering more reliable network service. What is a virtual private cloud (VPC)? Explore how virtual private clouds offer enterprises the ability to establish a private cloud-like experience within a public cloud infrastructure. What is Software-Defined Networking (SDN)? Learn how SDN as a network architecture enables network virtualization, greater flexibility and efficiency compared to traditional networking approaches. What is a content delivery network (CDN)? Explore how a CDN, consisting of a network of geographically dispersed servers, improve customer satisfaction by optimizing website and mobile app performance. Quantum View all quantum topics What is quantum computing? Leverage quantum computing, a rapidly emerging technology, that harnesses the laws of quantum mechanics to solve problems too complex for classical computers. What is quantum cryptography? Encrypt and transmit secure data with quantum cryptography, leveraging the naturally occurring and immutable laws of quantum mechanics. What is quantum-safe cryptography? Secure sensitive data, access and communications for the era of quantum computing with quantum-safe cryptography. What is a qubit? Encode data with a qubit, the basic unit of information in quantum computing, which serves as the quantum equivalent of the traditional bit in classical computers. What is quantum-centric supercomputing? Leverage quantum-centric supercomputing to combine quantum and traditional high-performance computing (HPC), enabling solutions for complex real-world problems. What is neuromorphic computing? Understand how neuromorphic computing, also known as neuromorphic engineering, mimics the way the human brain works. What is supercomputing? Explore how supercomputing uses high-performance computing systems to determine or calculate, reducing the overall time to a solution. Security and identity View all security topics What is cybersecurity? Stay informed about cybersecurity technology, types of threats and best practices to protect your critical systems and sensitive information from cyberattacks. What is malware? Learn how malware or “malicious software&#34;, such as ransomware, trojan horses and spyware can harm computer systems or their users by compromising data security. What is CAPTCHA? Discover how CAPTCHA, or &#34;Completely automated public turing test”, authenticates users as humans to prevent threats posed by malicious bots. What is SIEM? Find out how SIEM software helps organizations recognize and address potential security threats and vulnerabilities before they disrupt business operations. What is cloud security? Secure your cloud environment with cloud security, a collection of procedures and technology to address external and internal threats to business security. What is a Security Operations Center (SOC)? Explore how an SOC unifies and coordinates all cybersecurity technologies and operations of an organization to improve threat detection, response and prevention. Sustainability View all sustainability topics What is inventory management? Learn how inventory management involves the tracking of inventory from manufacturers to warehouses and from these facilities to a point of sale. What is order management? Understand how order management systems track orders from inception to fulfillment and manage the people, processes and data connected to the order. What is energy management? Explore how energy management helps businesses proactively monitor, control and optimize energy consumption to converse use and reduce energy costs. What is electronic data interchange (EDI)? Learn how electronic data interchange (EDI) is used to exchange business information, saving time and eliminating costly errors caused by manual processing. What is managed file transfer? Facilitate secure, reliable and automated exchange of file-based data over the internet with managed file transfer (MFT) technology to meet compliance needs. What is the TCFD? Find out how the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) seeks to keep investors better-informed about companies&#39; climate-related risks. Explore more ways to learn Stay ahead with the latest tech news Weekly insights, research and expert views on AI, security, cloud and more in the Think Newsletter Sign up now Videos Unlock deeper knowledge through expert-led videos and YouTube playlists spotlighting top tech topics and trends. Build fundamentals, boost skills and apply practical strategies to harness technology. Watch the videos Podcasts Explore our diverse podcast series, featuring expert discussions on top tech topics, real-world application of our products and a look at our culture of diversity, learning and agility. Tune in to our podcasts