Demand Management | Oracle Skip to content Accessibility Policy Products Industries Resources Customers Partners Developers Company Close Search Search Oracle.com QUICK LINKS Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Oracle Fusion Cloud Applications Oracle AI Database Download Java Careers at Oracle Search Country View Accounts Back Cloud Account Sign in to Cloud Sign Up for Free Cloud Tier Oracle Account Sign-In Create an Account Help Sign Out Contact Sales Menu Menu Overview SCM Products Supply Chain Planning Inventory Management Manufacturing Maintenance Order Management Logistics Product Lifecycle Management Procurement SCM Analytics SCM for Industries Automotive Communications Consumer Goods Federal Government Healthcare High Tech Life Sciences Industrial Manufacturing Oil and Gas Restaurants Retail Travel and Transportation Wholesale Distribution What's New Oracle AI for SCM Why choose Oracle AI for SCM over SAP, Workday, Kinaxis, RELEX, Palantir, and Blue Yonder? Smart Operations Accelerate Product Innovation and Go-to-Market Clinically Integrated Supply Chain Compare Oracle Cloud SCM for Healthcare to Workday Business Insights Applications Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Planning Oracle Demand Management Sense, predict, and shape demand to improve your demand forecasting accuracy and inventory strategies. Ensure that the right product is at the right place, at the right time. Simplify demand planning and dynamically segment demand. Take a tour Oracle Fusion Cloud Demand Management Sense demand Predict demand Shape demand Automate replenishment Sense demand to improve visibility Manage multiple demand signals Assimilate internal, customer, and marketing signals to create a holistic view of demand. Dynamically segment demand Use business rules to assign groups of items and locations to segments that share common demand characteristics. Analyze demand Monitor business KPIs to detect changes in market conditions and assess the impact. Capture business insights Drive accountability by documenting plan discussions, decisions, and assumptions. Read the Demand Management datasheet (PDF) Take the Demand Management product tour Predict demand to manage variability Generate accurate forecasts Improve demand forecasting accuracy by evaluating baseline, trend, seasonality, and causal forecasting components by segment. Enhance planning with built-in intelligence Improve plan accuracy with built-in machine learning that evaluates intermittency, collinearity, anomalies, level shifts, price changes, holidays, and events. Create a robust demand plan Enhance your baseline plan by adjusting your demand forecast to incorporate business knowledge and address exceptions. Forecast configure-to-order products Improve customer service by simulating the impact of changes to model forecasts and calculate attach rates. Measure and track forecast accuracy Monitor and diagnose the root causes of demand forecast errors and track improvements by segment. Read the Demand Management datasheet (PDF) Intelligently shape demand to achieve business objectives Forecast new products Manage new product launches by learning from similar products. Add new channels, customers, and geographies. Simulate forecast scenarios Make more informed decisions by simulating and comparing multiple demand forecasting scenarios. Collaborate to synchronize demand planning Increase responsiveness and improve availability by collaborating with cross-functional teams on planning demand and supply. Read the Demand Management datasheet (PDF) Replenish to meet demand-driven inventory targets Tailor inventory policy planning to demand segments Establish inventory policy thresholds for groups of item locations that have similar replenishment requirements. Calculate demand-driven replenishments Generate the time-phased replenishment quantities needed to keep supply within inventory thresholds. Simulate replenishment results Select and compare the effect of different inventory policy parameters to enhance replenishment planning performance. Execute the plan Release replenishment orders for execution based on the latest demand, supply, and policy settings. Read the Replenishment Planning solution brief (PDF) Demand management and planning use cases Anticipate the demand for new products Improve your forecast accuracy by learning from similar products, reconciling marketing forecasts, and incorporating executive feedback. Cleveland Golf increases on-time shipments (1:32) Synchronize demand planning to drive consensus Collaborate simultaneously on demand and supply plans with cross-functional teams. LiDestri improves forecasts (1:43) May 9, 2022 Moving your supply chain planning to the cloud? Consider these 5 key areas Daniel Bachar, Director of Product Marketing, Oracle Organizations are taking big steps ahead of their competitors, investing in new supply chain planning solutions to help them improve their operations and processes. Moving supply chain planning to the cloud is a shift that every organization is either thinking about, or already doing. No matter how synchronized your supply chain planning is on-premises, having your supply chain planning solution in the cloud will provide many new benefits. Read the full article Featured blogs View all Demand management and planning resources Cloud readiness Documentation Customer community Support and services Learn what's new in the latest Demand Management software release Review readiness material to learn what's new in your Cloud Demand Management service and plan for quarterly updates. Get the latest Demand Management updates Access a library of documentation Oracle Help Center provides detailed information about our products and services with targeted solutions, getting started guides, and content for advanced use cases. Get started with Oracle Demand Management Join a community of your peers Cloud Customer Connect is Oracle's premier online cloud community. With more than 200,000 members, it's designed to promote peer-to-peer collaboration and sharing of best practices, product updates, and feedback. Join today Support My Oracle Support Support Policies and Practices Customer Success Services Services Soar to Cloud Migration Services Consulting Find a Partner Related Demand Management products Supply chain planning (SCP) Improve resilience and outpace change See supply chain planning Supply planning Improve operational efficiency See supply planning Sales and operations planning Align planning and execution across the enterprise See sales and operations planning Supply chain collaboration Automate business-to-business practices with trading partners See supply chain collaboration Get started with Oracle Demand Management Demand Management live demo Take a walkthrough with one of our supply chain planning experts. Get a live demo Demand Management product tour Take a tour of Oracle’s Demand Management and explore our supply chain planning products. Browse tours Contact SCM Sales Talk to a team member about Demand Management. Contact us Resources for Careers Developers Investors Partners Researchers Students and Educators Why Oracle Analyst Reports Best cloud-based ERP Cloud Economics Social Impact Security Practices Learn What is a sovereign cloud? What is zero trust security? How AI is transforming finance What is a vector database? What is multicloud? What are AI agents? News and Events News Oracle AI World Oracle Health Summit JavaOne Search all events Contact Us US Sales: +1.800.633.0738 How can we help? Subscribe to emails Integrity Helpline Accessibility Country/Region &copy; 2026 Oracle Privacy / Do Not Sell My Info Ad Choices Careers