Demand Forecasting - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics Skip to Main content ScienceDirect Journals &amp; Books Help Search My account Sign in Demand Forecasting In subject area: Engineering Load forecasting is defined as the process of predicting future energy requirements of a system for a specific period, which aids in matching demands with generation strategies. It can utilize various methods, including statistical approaches and artificial intelligence-based models. AI generated definition based on: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 2017 How useful is this definition? Press Enter to select rating, 1 out of 3 stars Press Enter to select rating, 2 out of 3 stars Press Enter to select rating, 3 out of 3 stars About this page Set alert On this page On this page Definition Chapters and Articles Related Terms Recommended Publications On this page Definition Chapters and Articles Related Terms Recommended Publications Chapters and Articles You might find these chapters and articles relevant to this topic. Review article Enhancing smart grid with microgrids: Challenges and opportunities 2017 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Yeliz Yoldaş Ahmet Önen S.M. Muyeen Athanasios V. Vasilakos İrfan Alan 4.2.1 Demand (load) forecasting Demand (Load) forecasting [45,46] plays a crucial role in smart grid. The aim of demand forecasting is to accurately predict future energy requirements of system for specific period of time. That prediction helps unit commitment strategies to match demands and generations. Since demands depend on weather conditions and activities of customers, predictions may be for the next 24/48 h in hourly for operation process, and may be for 20–50 years for planning purposes [47] . Many of methods for demand forecasting are introduced in literature. These methods can be classified as two sections: i) statistical based methods, ii) artificial intelligence (AI) based methods. Statistical based methods include Auto Regressive (AR) [48] , Moving Average (MA) [49] , Auto Regressive Moving Average (ARMA) [45] , and Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) [50] . Some of the artificial intelligence based forecasting models are Artificial Neural Network(ANN) [51] , Grey-Back Propagation (GBP) Neural Network [52] , improved variable learning rate back propagation (IVL-BP) [53] , support vector machines (SVMs) [54] , Least Squares-Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) Algorithm [55] , particle swarm optimization (PSO) [56] , and fuzzy logic (FL) [57] . Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032117300746 Journal 2017 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Yeliz Yoldaş Ahmet Önen S.M. Muyeen Athanasios V. Vasilakos İrfan Alan Chapter Forecasting energy demand with econometrics 2021 , Mathematical Modelling of Contemporary Electricity Markets Theodosios Perifanis Abstract Demand forecasting is of crucial importance in the liberalized electricity markets. Many electricity markets have been under considerable regulatory transformations like unbundling. Further, issues like energy transition, electronic vehicles, distributed energy sources, environmental regulation and energy storage will alter the nature of the electricity demand in the future. Since supply capacity is almost constant in the short-term, it is important to derive a sharp forecast on demand. However, this is difficult since demand forecasting in the short-term is dependable on many variables (hour, season, working or public holiday day). Further, market stakeholders must decide on future investment. Future capacity is dependable on future demand. Long-term forecasting is difficult and subject to different drivers. We apply econometrics to investigate the relationship between economic (price and GDP), and weather conditions (number of heating and cooling degrees) in three European markets. We investigate the demand’s reactions both in the long- and short-term. Our results differ even if we researched countries with common energy regulations. European Energy Union aims at a fully integrated market. Market stakeholders should take this kind of convergence into consideration but also the still markets’ regionality. Show more View chapter Explore book Read full chapter URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128218389000013 Book 2021 , Mathematical Modelling of Contemporary Electricity Markets Theodosios Perifanis Review article Artificial intelligence techniques for enabling Big Data services in distribution networks: A review 2021 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Sara Barja-Martinez , ... Roberto Villafafila-Robles 4.5.1 Demand forecasting The demand forecasting service predicts the consumption profiles of a single or several end-users. For instance, the day ahead aggregated demand forecasting of a particular zone is essential for the DSO to foresee possible congestion in the network. The emergence of prosumers – a consumer who produces and consumes energy – in the power system has caused an increment in the uncertainty of the demand profile, as consumption has become more unpredictable and volatile due to demand response programs and weather conditions that affect in last stay the end-users self-consumption. The system operator does not have information regarding the self-consumption behind each smart meter; therefore, predicting consumption becomes even more complex. Reviews focusing on AI load forecasting techniques are conducted in the literature. For instance, a study comparing conventional and AI-based models for energy forecasting is carried out in [160] . A systematic review is presented in [161] and it concludes that regression models are the most suitable for long-term scenarios, whereas ML algorithms outperform for the short-term forecasting horizon. The combination of different ML algorithms is analyzed in [162] . In a narrower framework, [160] presents several research papers that implement data-driven models for building scale forecastings. A survey of statistical and conventional methods for demand forecasting is presented in [163] , concluding that Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) statistical model combined with ANN increases the accuracy of predictions. The authors in [164] review load forecasting methodologies based on previous literature, classifying them into four forecasting methods: similar patterns, variable selection, hierarchical forecasting and weather station selection. The most common and relevant input data found in the literature for demand forecasting are mostly historical demand data along with seasonal factors like weather and calendar data [12,165] . According to [141] , essential parameters for system electricity demand are weather data and random effects, such as maintenance work or customer behavior, where the game theory approach helps predict erratic performance [166] . Three demand forecasting levels are distinguished: the aggregated demand within an area or zone, the aggregated demand in a building/household through smart meters and the disaggregated demand, which predicts the consumption of electrical appliances behind the meter thanks to the implementation of sensors that store their consumption data (also known as sub-metering). Disaggregated demand forecasting plays a vital role in DR programs; hence, data are crucial to predict their consumption to make accurate and optimal load scheduling. On the contrary, in case of not having a sensor for each flexible load, the Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM) method identifies each assets’ consumption curve in order to predict the power consumption of each appliance directly from the smart meter data. Recent literature covers different load identification methods that classify the assets behind-the-meter for NILM methods using AI techniques [167–172] . Unsupervised clustering techniques are implemented to classify buildings based on their energy efficiency [12] , determine natural segmentation of customers [173] , identify appliances usage patterns [172,174] , estimate electricity consumption behavior patterns in households [173,175,176] , group households profiles patterns to achieve better forecasting outcomes [177–180] and to identify peak demand profiles or electricity theft detection [123] . Dimension reduction of NILM features is applied in [181] . DT and Naive Bayes (NB) are used to identify residential device loads [182] . Studies focus mainly on short-term prediction for network operation purposes. In contrast, there are barely any long-term studies. As for the latter, long-term forecastings require residential and non-residential inputs, as historical gross domestic product or population, to estimate demand in the following years, applying data-driven approaches such as Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) analysis [183] . It is concluded that long-term prediction models combine energy, economic and environmental fields for planning the energy future in a sustainable manner [163] . Table 7 describes the AI techniques used for developing load forecasting models for different time horizons and locations, identifying the main evaluation metrics. Table 7 . Load forecasting models and evaluation metrics. Data-driven technique Forecast horizon Location Year Highlights Evaluation metrics Ref. Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell MAE MAPE RMSE Other Empty Cell Aggregated demand forecasting DNN, RF Short-term US 2019 Electricity consumption for residential buildings for the next day. • [180] MLP Short-term France 2018 Wavelet decomposition to capture the various seasonal cycles in electricity load data. • • [184] DNN Short-term Australia 2019 Advanced data preprocessing strategy. DBN has outstanding data learning and forecasting capabilities • • • MSE [185] ARIMA-WaveletNN Short-term US, Australia 2018 The WNN has a strong ability to fit the nonlinear component of the electricity load • • • [186] SVM Short-term US 2018 The features extracted by the auto-enconders forecast day-ahead load forecasting more accurately • [187] CNN-LSTM Short-term UK 2019 Day-ahead aggregated load forecasting based on two-terminal sparse coding and DNN • • MSE [179] SVM, ELM Mid-term UK 2020 ELM performs better than SVM for 1 week prediction • • • MSE [188] Autocorrelation-SVM Mid-term Australia 2019 Forecast next week electricity demand • • R 2 [189] MLP Mid-term US 2020 Optimal training algorithm composed of two PSO and ALO • MSE [158] MLR Long-term West Africa 2019 Hourly and annual electricity consumption estimation for 2030 in 14 different West African countries • • [183] Multiplicative error model Long-term US 2018 Monthly aggregated load prediction for a horizon of four years • MSE [190] Smart meter load forecasting LSTM Real-time China 2020 Demand forecasting from an industrial steel plant • • • [154] LSTM Real-time Australia 2020 Probabilistic household load forecasting under high uncertainty and volatility • • [191] DT, RF Real-time/short-term Spain 2018 Focuses on online environments where data are analyzed as they arrive • • • [192] DNN Short-term US 2020 Aggregated households load forecasting • • R 2 [193] LSTM, MLP Short-term US 2019 Energy Big Data is used as data set for load and price forecasting • • [151] LSTM Short-term Ireland 2018 The model aims to learn the uncertainty by applying a pooling Deep RNN. It is tested in 920 smart meters • • [194] CNN Short-term South Korea 2019 Single residential load forecasting using CNN combined with data-augmentation technique • • [195] DNN Short-term China 2018 Power load and probability density forecasting • • [196] LSTM Short-term Australia 2019 Individual and aggregated residential load forecasting • [197] MLP, SVM, MLR Short/Long-term Cyprus 2020 SVM and ANN achieve the best outcomes • [198] K-means-MLP Short-term Honk Kong 2020 Day-ahead office building cooling demand, grouped in seasons • [199] Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032121007413 Journal 2021 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Sara Barja-Martinez , ... Roberto Villafafila-Robles Review article A systematic review of machine learning techniques related to local energy communities 2022 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Alejandro Hernandez-Matheus , ... Andreas Sumper 5.1 Forecasting Forecasting is the process of predicting a variable in the future by analysing historical data trends. Demand and generation forecasting are of great importance to the system operators of electrical grids. The frequency of occurrence of the algorithms that were used in the reviewed studies for each forecast application is illustrated in Fig. 3 . Forecasting studies are commonly classified to their time horizon prediction: short-term, medium-term, and long-term [57] . However, certain studies approach the problem on a very short-term horizon [61,68] . The forecasting interval depends on the purpose on the forecast. For daily operation tasks, very short-term and short-term are the required time horizon, whereas for grid planning and investment evaluation, a long-term horizon is preferred [40] . Table 6 shows the machine learning algorithms in the literature review for different forecast tasks classified according to time horizons listed in Table 5 . Fig. 3 . Machine learning techniques used for forecasting in literature. Table 5 . Forecast time horizons. Forecast horizon Time interval Very short-term 1 s to less than 1 h Short-term Few minutes to few days Medium-term Few days to few months Long-term Months, quarters, years Table 6 . Machine learning (ML) techniques for forecasting. Forecast topic Task ML Algorithm Forecast horizon Year Source Demand forecasting Load curve SVM Short term, medium term 2021 [69] Hybrid models Short term, long term 2020 [70] CNN Short term 2019 [71] LSTM Short term 2020 [72] Households Various Short term 2020 [73] Linear models Short term 2018 [74] Various medium term 2020 [75] LSTM, SVM Short term 2019 [76] LSTM Short term 2018 [77] Households and SME Markov Model Short term 2019 [78] Appliances LSTM Short term 2020 [79] Residential space heating and cooling loads CNN Long term 2020 [80] Machine tools SVM, NN Very short term 2020 [68] Power demand for different facilities LSTM Short term, long term 2020 [63] AC energy consumption LSTM Short term 2019 [81] Rural microgrid NN Short term 2020 [82] Renewable energy forecasting PV generation LSTM Short term 2019, 2020 [83,84] Various Short term 2019 [85] Various Various 2019 [61] PV generation, wind generation and demand NARX NN Short term 2019 [86] Wind forecasting Various Various 2020 [87] Flexibility forecasting Demand side flexibility LSTM - MILP Short term 2021 [88] Boosted decision trees Short term, medium term 2020 [89] GLME Medium term 2019 [90] Decision trees – 2021 [91] EV charging demand prediction Boosted decision trees – 2020 [49] EV charging navigation Q-learning – 2020 [92] Price forecasting Price forecasting Turkish market Various Short term 2018 [93] Price forecasting Iberian market NN Short term 2018 [94] Price forecasting EPEX Various Short term, long term 2019 [95] Various Price, generation, demand Various Short term 2021 [96] 5.1.1 Demand forecasting The literature on demand forecasting represents the largest share of the recent literature on energy forecasting. This is because of the increased uncertainty in the operation owing to the addition of new actors to the energy system, such as prosumers or new assets, which can act as flexible loads and shift or reduce their consumption during specific periods [48] . An accurate prediction of demand helps to improve the operation of an LEC [97,98] . For LECs with controllable loads, several control strategies rely on an accurate forecasting model [99] . Demand forecasting can be performed at individual, community, or asset level facilitated by the data gathering ability of smart meters and ICT infrastructure. In terms of the asset level, machine learning regression models such as K-nearest neighbours (KNN), decision trees and neural networks (NNs) have been explored to accurately predict the consumption of two machine tools in a factory in a very short-term horizon [68] . A combination of an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model with a nonlinear support vector machine (SVM) has been used to predict the electrical consumption of an air conditioner by employing the data retrieved from smart meters [81] . Similarly, [80] compared linear models, linear and nonlinear SVMs, and NNs to predict annual heating and cooling loads in residential spaces in a long-term prediction task; the optimal results were obtained using nonlinear SVMs. At individual level, researches [73] approached the short-term forecast of the energy consumption of three households in a nanogrid via smart meter data by reviewing several supervised learning algorithms. Refs. [74,76] have discussed on the high volatility and uncertainty of residential load profiles; Long short-term memory neural networks (LSTMS) were used to obtain short-term household forecasts, yielding minimal prediction errors. At community level, load forecasts are usually performed by considering aggregated load. For example, different algorithms have been used to forecast one day-ahead energy consumption in a residential building [77] . The authors first reviewed several single algorithms and subsequently combined these algorithms with an optimisation technique, thereby achieving improved results with the latter technique. Ref. [63] forecasted short-term and long-term energy consumption of different buildings, ranging from a residential to a factory and hospital, and the challenges of each profile have been reported. The authors compare mixed-data sampling method with LSTMs and a combination of both methods, resulting in a more accurate result. In contrast to deterministic methods, probabilistic methods have been applied in certain studies. These methods extend the capabilities of the deterministic model by quantifying the uncertainty factors in the load forecasting task. As exemplified in [71] , the authors trained recurrent neural networks (RNNs) using a probabilistic objective function to forecast the day-ahead load consumption. Probabilistic output prediction provides information on risk and related scenarios for decision making in the operation planning of the energy system [78] . Moreover, a semi-hidden Markov model have been developed to predict short-term consumption of home appliances [79] . 5.1.2 Renewable generation forecasting Most LECs will have renewable energy sources to fulfil their energy needs and sustainability goals. Accordingly, the nature of these energy generation sources results in a significant level of uncertainty in the energy supply [37,100] . An example has been reported [101] , wherein multiple methods were reviewed, including nonlinear autoregressive exogenous neural networks (NARX NN), Gaussian process regression, and SVM, to forecast the behaviour of wind generation, PV generation, and demand for households. The authors assessed the inputs needed for each predictive task and highlighted the NARX NN as a robust model for wind and PV generation by conducting a sensitivity analysis. As reported in the literature [96] , the results for wind generation forecasts were improved through the incorporation of exogenous information when comparing deterministic and probabilistic methods. Similarly, NARX NNs have been used [102,103] for wind and PV generation. As mentioned in Section 2.1 , PV generation is one of the most popular technologies for the generation of renewable energy in households and communities. Therefore, a number of studies have focused on this particular application. For instance, the statistical and machine learning methods for PV generation forecast have been comparatively analysed [61] . Finally, the authors compared a hybrid combination of two methods and an optimisation theorem, concluding hybrid methods increase the forecasting accuracy by adding benefits of individual methods. The performances of several machine learning algorithms have been analysed to predict the PV generation for a power plant [85] ; the importance of input data, such as weather, for the prediction performance has been analysed to predict of PV generation for a power plant. The optimal results were obtained using random forest. RNNs have been extensively explored in the literature for forecast tasks concerning PV generation; for example, LSTMs have been implemented to predict the output power of different PV generation plants for a short-term time horizon [83,84] . 5.1.3 Flexibility forecasting From a prosumer’s perspective, flexibility can be defined as the ability to modulate generation/consumption behaviour via an external signal, such as a change in the energy price [104] . Flexibility is a service that can be provided within the LEC at both household and community levels (refer to Fig. 1 ). Flexibility forecasting is based on load forecasting, considering the available flexibility sources [90] . Accurate flexibility estimation allows the LEC and its participants to generate revenue by selling flexibility to a system operator, such as Cornwall Local Energy Market [13] . In accordance with the classification reported in [105] , flexible assets can be classified as demand side, supply side, and storage assets. This section focuses on the demand side flexibility and storage. For flexibility estimation, [88] the economic optimisation of an energy management system has been attempted in an urban microgrid, considering the flexibility of ancillary services. The load consumption forecast was performed using LSTM. Furthermore, mixed integer linear programming (MILP) was used to optimise the energy dispatch in the day-ahead operation of the microgrid with three different types of loads: building, smart homes with and without available PV capacity, and differently clustered loads. In another study [89] , the authors forecast the loads’ total consumption and flexibility using boosted trees for both day-ahead and week-ahead time horizons in a commercial building. In a study [90] , the flexibility was calculated for a single household for one month using generalised linear mixed-effect models (GLMM). The present study also analyses the flexibility at the household asset level. With the novel vehicle-to-grid (V2G) technology, EV charging stations in the grid serve as a flexible asset. V2G can operate as an available energy storage device, thereby acting as a flexibility source [106] . In addition, they can be considered as a mobile energy storage system [105] . Therefore, they are also subject of study for forecasting flexibility calculations. To this end [49] , prediction methods for the EV charging demand during charging sessions have been studied to optimise the management of the electric grid. Models such as linear regression, boosted decision trees, random forest, and SVM were used to predict the charging demand of EVs for flexibility predictions. Ref. [92] proposes a storage optimisation problem for EVs incorporating uncertainty caused by traffic solved by a RL model-free Q-learning algorithm. The use of decision trees has been evaluated for flexibility-based operational planning dispatch in a microgrid system connected to the grid, with storage, renewable generation, critical loads, and an industrial controller [91] . The authors comment on the feasibility of implementing decision tree-based rule programming in a PLC-based controller and highlight its interpretability in the dispatch rules compared to other state-of-the-art alternatives such as NNs. 5.1.4 Electricity price forecasting Electricity price forecasting is an application for both community and peer-to-peer market-level configurations. A forecast of the energy price at a specific time in the future provides valuable information for handling load consumption and flexibility more efficiently [107] . Moreover, price forecasting helps to create optimised programs to efficiently dispatch the energy within the LEC, by supporting efficient resource scheduling decisions [57] . In this section, although most of the studies focus on centralised energy markets, they are highly relevant for LECs. Most of the studies on LECs focus on the day-ahead electricity price forecasting. The price forecasting has been analysed in the Turkish day-ahead market using an RNN, and the method was compared with several other NN architectures [93] . The optimal results were obtained using the gated recurrent unit configuration of RNN. The authors highlight the capabilities of this algorithm to capture spikes and volatility. Similarly, scholars [94] implemented a regression technique using NN to predict day-ahead prices in the Iberian electricity market. Additionally, researches [95] approached electricity price forecasting for both day-ahead and a four-week time horizon in EPEX 1 in Germany/Austria. Reportedly, amongst the algorithms tested, the optimal results were achieved using NNs. Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032122005433 Journal 2022 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Alejandro Hernandez-Matheus , ... Andreas Sumper Review article Computational Intelligence in the hospitality industry: A systematic literature review and a prospect of challenges 2021 , Applied Soft Computing Juan Guerra-Montenegro , ... Javier Del Ser 4.3 Tourism demand forecasting Along with customer sentiment analysis and satisfaction degree, demand forecasting is one of the biggest research areas in hospitality forecasting. Being able to predict how many customers a hospitality establishment or service is going to get at a certain time is undoubtedly useful to prepare services for a certain load or to coordinate to prevent overbooking or service overloading. With the rise of ML methodologies, forecasting these parameters is somehow easier than before, although it depends on the methodologies used for this purpose. The use of ANNs is kind of standard, comprising almost a 54% of the used techniques, followed by SVMs which are usually combined with ANNs to improve the forecasting models. In 2005, [51] researched about the feasibility of SVMs combined with Back-Propagation Neural Networks (BPNN) to successfully forecast tourism demand. A few years later, [157] applied a novel approach in this field by combining SVR with genetic algorithms in order to find and apply optimal parameters to construct the SVR model. Additionally, [149] also applied the latter technique demonstrating that a combination of genetic algorithms and SVR, namely GA-SVR, is a feasible technique for tourism demand forecasting. Authors in [25] applied ANFIS to demonstrate its feasibility over other three models, namely fuzzy time series, Gray forecasting model and Markov residual modified model, in forecasting tourist arrivals. In [52] , an empirical mode decomposition model combined with BPNNs was used to forecast tourism demand in a more precise way by decomposing raw data and by summing the predictions of both models. In 2013, authors in [30] proposed a hybrid forecasting model for customer cancellations, based on the combination of BPNNs and generalized regression neural networks. In 2014 [53] proposed an ANN forecasting model combined with time series, thus being able to predict tourism demand in a seasonal basis. [32] states that BPNNs suffer from significant drawbacks, so an ensemble of BPNN combined with Bagging was used to overcome these inherent drawbacks. In 2015, [83] compared various ML techniques, namely Seasonal ARIMA, v-SVR and a multi-layer perceptron ANN, to find the most suitable one for tourism demand forecasting, being the second one the best for these kind of predictions. Additionally, [54] used multi-layer perceptron and SVR models to deterministically generate auxiliary variables that outline different time series components and enhance forecasting performance. With this ANN trend in demand forecasting research, [55] compared three different ANN techniques: multi-layer perceptron, RBF and Elman networks, in order to compare their performance, finding that the two first techniques outperform the latter one, and also demonstrating that dimensionality is very important for long-term predictions. In the research work exposed by [56] the researchers used an extreme learning machine to calculate different variables that improve the final forecasting model, even outperforming SVRs. In 2016, [33] exposed the importance of forecast horizon on model selection by comparing performances of SVR with a RBF kernel to ANNs using a linear model as a benchmark. [59] also compared the performance of BPNNs against other ANN techniques, such as KNN and multiple linear regression by using genetic algorithms to optimize BPNN parameters, thus demonstrating that BPNNs have smaller prediction errors in terms of root mean square error. [60] also studied the feasibility of BPNNs to forecast tourism demand by using MATLAB. [57] studied the suitability of SVR, Gaussian process regression and ANNs regional predictions combined to generate more accurate forecasting models, which was specially true when the forecast horizons increase. In 2017, [61] examined various methodologies, namely ANNs, locally deep SVMs, decision jungles, decision trees and boosted decision trees, to accurately forecast hotel booking cancellations. [62] compared the performance of Deep Learning, SVMs and ANNs for tourist number forecasting, finding that Deep Learning outperforms the other two methods in accuracy. [63] also compared the feasibility of Gaussian process regression against ANNs in a multiple-input multiple-output setting, finding that as the models’ memory increases the forecasting performance of Gaussian process regression, though ANNs using RBF outperform Gaussian process regression for long-term forecasting. In [64] , BPNNs are once again compared against linear regression methods, proving their feasibility as a tourism demand forecasting method and a decision making tool. Additionally, [65] proposed a possible tourism demand forecasting method by means of a combined cross-view model based on BPNN and SVR algorithms. [67] also used ANNs to forecast tourist arrivals by comparing them to SVMs, the latter being outperformed by the first method in terms of root mean absolute error. In [105] , a Gray-Markov model is used to predict foreign tourist income by incorporating neural networks in their forecasting model. [68] proposed a kernel-based extreme learning machine to forecast tourist arrivals, being a successful model because its better precision compared to other methods. In [66] BPNNs are used to predict tourist arrivals in Bali. Lastly, in 2018 Kamel et al. [1] investigated the performance of seven different ML methods (multi-layer perceptron, RBF, generalized regression neural networks, KNN, classification and regression trees, SVR and Gaussian process regression), showing that there are differences between these methods, but also that there is no best method in the obtained results, which were analyzed by mean absolute percentage error. SVMs and SVRs have also been used in tourism demand forecasting, although it seems that these methods’ forecasting accuracy is often outperformed by ANNs. However, there have been many studies about this topic. In [122] a SVMs are used with kernel logistic regression to successfully forecast cancellation rates, allowing to manage revenue in a more accurate way. [117] presented a useful tourism demand forecasting hybrid model by combining fuzzy C-Means with logarithm least-squares SVR (called LLS-SVR), additionally using genetic algorithms in order to optimally select the parameters of their hybrid model. Additionally, [152] demonstrated that their adaptive genetic algorithms combined with seasonal SVR, outperform normal SVR and BPNNs in tourist flow forecasting. In 2016, [153] used SVMs alongside kernel logistic regression to prove that is possible to generate models to predict booking cancellations with high accuracy. In [82] various regression methods, including SVR, were analyzed to discover that SVR outperforms multiple linear regression and multi-layer perceptron regression models in tourism demand forecasting. In [154] SVR is also hybridized with a seasonal component and optimized by the fruit fly optimization algorithm, yielding positive results that position this model as a feasible tourism forecast solution. [161] extracted fuzzy Takagi–Sugeno rules from trained SVMs to increase the tourism demand forecasting accuracy, and also providing understandable information for decision makers. [158] combined wavelet analysis with SVMs, creating a “WSVM” model that outperforms a normal SVM-based model. In 2017, [159] proposed a modified least square SVM to forecast passenger flow in holidays for the metro system, using an improved particle swarm optimization algorithm is used to optimize the parameters. [155] exposed a seasonal variation SVR method to forecast tourist flows, discovering that SVR is more precise than multivariate linear regression methods. Lastly, [156] developed a hybrid SVR algorithm, combined with the bat algorithm in order to forecast tourist volume by optimizing SVR parameters with it, creating a BA-SVR method that can outperform the normal SVR method. Other ML methods have also been applied in this area, but in a minor extend. As seen before, genetic algorithms have also been used to optimize different parameters inside other ML methods, yielding more precise results than their not optimized counterparts. [180] and [178] combined genetic algorithms with fuzzy logic techniques. [150] also applied chaotic genetic algorithms to forecast tourism demand and overcome classic problems caused by this method. [171] combined clustering with fuzzy logic techniques along genetic algorithms using symbiotic evolution for fitness assignment. In [113] Gaussian process regression applied to tourism demand is compared against autoregressive moving average and SVM models by adding a sparsity component which reduces the computational complexity and increases its generalization ability. [114] applied ANOVA and stepwise regression in Chinese gaming destinations, generating a model that was useful in finding determinants of hotel occupancy rate. Lastly, as seen in [151] , decision trees and their ensembles have also been tested in this forecasting field, the latter ones outperforming their single counterparts in terms of forecasting accuracy. There is not much room in this area for new research opportunities, but new model ensembles and new hybrid models might be waiting to be discovered. Hybrid techniques have also been proven to be useful in tourism demand forecasting, sometimes outperforming ANNs and SVMs. Additionally, tourism demand is an ever-changing field where tourist flow usually changes over time, so the use of data stream mining techniques might be useful not only in terms of data storage and processing optimization, but also in models that can adapt over time. Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494621000053 Journal 2021 , Applied Soft Computing Juan Guerra-Montenegro , ... Javier Del Ser Chapter Energy demand forecasting 2020 , Energy for Sustainable Development M.A. Islam , ... N.A. Rahim 5.1 Introduction The process of prediction, estimation, or projection of future activities, occurrences, or events is called forecasting. Hence, energy demand forecasting is the estimating of future energy consumption based on the various data and information available. Generally, demand forecasting is done by projecting past data/information into some mathematical models to predict the trend of future energy demand. This includes no just the magnitude but also location of load demand as a function of time. Such information is essential for financial and operational planning in electricity distribution systems. Generally, energy demand forecasting can be classified into three categories based on the forecasting horizon,—i.e., how far into the future is the prediction done? Types of forecasting Forecasting horizon Purpose Short-term 1 h to 1 week Normally applied for scheduling and analyses of the distribution network Medium-term 1 month to 5 years Normally used for planning resources and tariffs, Long-term 5–20 years Managing resources and making development plan Accurate forecasting of energy demand is a very important yet challenging task because the change of energy demand with time can be affected by various environmental and socioeconomic factors ( Abdel-Aal, 2008 ). Fig. 5.1 shows world energy consumption history (2011–2012) and future energy demand forecasting to the year 2040 by the International Energy Agency. Figure 5.1 . World energy consumption history (2011–12) and future energy demand forecasting to the year 2040 ( EIA, 2016 ). Show more View chapter Explore book Read full chapter URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128146453000055 Book 2020 , Energy for Sustainable Development M.A. Islam , ... N.A. Rahim Review article A systematic review of machine learning techniques related to local energy communities 2022 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Alejandro Hernandez-Matheus , ... Andreas Sumper 5.1.1 Demand forecasting The literature on demand forecasting represents the largest share of the recent literature on energy forecasting. This is because of the increased uncertainty in the operation owing to the addition of new actors to the energy system, such as prosumers or new assets, which can act as flexible loads and shift or reduce their consumption during specific periods [48] . An accurate prediction of demand helps to improve the operation of an LEC [97,98] . For LECs with controllable loads, several control strategies rely on an accurate forecasting model [99] . Demand forecasting can be performed at individual, community, or asset level facilitated by the data gathering ability of smart meters and ICT infrastructure. In terms of the asset level, machine learning regression models such as K-nearest neighbours (KNN), decision trees and neural networks (NNs) have been explored to accurately predict the consumption of two machine tools in a factory in a very short-term horizon [68] . A combination of an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model with a nonlinear support vector machine (SVM) has been used to predict the electrical consumption of an air conditioner by employing the data retrieved from smart meters [81] . Similarly, [80] compared linear models, linear and nonlinear SVMs, and NNs to predict annual heating and cooling loads in residential spaces in a long-term prediction task; the optimal results were obtained using nonlinear SVMs. At individual level, researches [73] approached the short-term forecast of the energy consumption of three households in a nanogrid via smart meter data by reviewing several supervised learning algorithms. Refs. [74,76] have discussed on the high volatility and uncertainty of residential load profiles; Long short-term memory neural networks (LSTMS) were used to obtain short-term household forecasts, yielding minimal prediction errors. At community level, load forecasts are usually performed by considering aggregated load. For example, different algorithms have been used to forecast one day-ahead energy consumption in a residential building [77] . The authors first reviewed several single algorithms and subsequently combined these algorithms with an optimisation technique, thereby achieving improved results with the latter technique. Ref. [63] forecasted short-term and long-term energy consumption of different buildings, ranging from a residential to a factory and hospital, and the challenges of each profile have been reported. The authors compare mixed-data sampling method with LSTMs and a combination of both methods, resulting in a more accurate result. In contrast to deterministic methods, probabilistic methods have been applied in certain studies. These methods extend the capabilities of the deterministic model by quantifying the uncertainty factors in the load forecasting task. As exemplified in [71] , the authors trained recurrent neural networks (RNNs) using a probabilistic objective function to forecast the day-ahead load consumption. Probabilistic output prediction provides information on risk and related scenarios for decision making in the operation planning of the energy system [78] . Moreover, a semi-hidden Markov model have been developed to predict short-term consumption of home appliances [79] . Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032122005433 Journal 2022 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Alejandro Hernandez-Matheus , ... Andreas Sumper Review article Artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches to energy demand-side response: A systematic review 2020 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Ioannis Antonopoulos , ... Steve Wattam 4.1.1 Load forecasting Prediction and estimation of loads is an integral part of a reliable and efficient power system operation. Effective demand forecasting is an important tool for tackling various issues in DR, including properly planning, rewarding DR participants, and estimating capacity potential of DR resources [ 18 ]. A widely used distinction of demand forecasting — based on prediction horizon — is long-term load forecasting ( &gt; 24 h ), and STLF ( &lt; 24 h ). In this review, the papers included are those which explicitly look the load forecasting problem in the DR domain. The reader interested in the wider spectrum of load forecasting in the smart grid context can refer to the review of Raza and Khosravi [ 18 ]. Another basic distinction is whether load is predicted while taking into account, or not, the DR factor. In the literature there is a variety of papers which estimate demand including reduction or shifting due to DR. The bulk of the papers predict demand for the short-term or day-ahead [ 57 , 58 , 78 , 93 , 176 , 196 , 200 , 203 , 215 , 217 ], but there are also papers forecasting the week ahead load [ 177 ]. Moreover, load forecasting has been performed in various aggregation levels; residential [ 58 , 173 , 174 , 199 ], large buildings [93, 187.196], and appliance-level (e.g. chiller, ice bank, lighting) [ 56 , 217 ]. For aggregated residential loads forecasting, Zhou et al. [ 58 ] and Zhou et al. [ 57 ] compare different forecasting techniques, including least squares, lasso and ridge regressions, kNN regression, SVR and decision tree regression. Similarly, Cheung et al. [ 78 ] provide a 1-h ahead aggregated load forecasting using SVR and ANN to a dataset already partitioned based on temporal features. Aggregated loads forecasting can also focus on determining day-ahead peak demand, either at a building level [ 93 ], or at a feeder or community level [ 203 , 215 ]. For domestic load forecasting, Pereira et al. [ 93 ] use an ANN based algorithm for single prosumer consumption and production forecast for day ahead, based on historic demand and temperature. Load forecasting at the appliance level can also be done with ANNs. Schachter and Mancarella [ 200 ] utilise ANNs for HVAC systems load forecasting, and Mohi Ud Din et al. [ 217 ] focus on the prediction of loads of domestic appliances by using deep neural networks with a PCA-based feature selection scheme. The case of load forecasting without factoring for DR is referred as baseline load estimation . The baseline load is the counterfactual power consumption in the absence of a DR scheme and is important in the context of DR [ 184 ]. The baseline consumption estimation of consumers plays a key role in the implementation of the various DR programs, and it is utilised to reliably estimate the consumers’ normal power consumption, which is subsequently used to reward the DR participants [ 184 ]. In the reviewed literature, there is work regarding baseline load estimation for a residential environment [ 89 , 184 ], industrial factories [ 64 ], and office buildings [ 76 , 194 , 248 ]. There are also instances of forecasting baseline using aggregated loads over time [ 60 , 61 ], over consumers [ 60 ], and over independent energy processes [ 194 ]. Aggregating loads can lead to smaller prediction variance, and allocation of DR rewards with much higher confidence. Complementary to the above, flexibility forecasting is frequently studied in the research literature. Flexibility is defined as the effect of the smart-grid control signal on the load — which is considered as a function of time, weather circumstances and the control signal — [ 67 ]. Knowledge of the available capacity for DR is considered crucial and is beneficial for developing and optimising DR-strategies, as well as for assessing their economic value [ 67 ]. In the context of VPPs, there is work that estimates the flexibility of a cluster of heating devices for DR, which are assumed either homogeneous [ 65 , 181 , 182 ], or heterogeneous [ 183 ]. The estimated flexibility can be traded either in a single market (DA) [ 65 , 183 ], or in multiple energy markets (intraday, DA market, imbalance) [ 181 , 182 ]. Further studies include flexibility forecasting of residential heating systems [ 67 ], aggregated flexibility prediction [ 191 ], and estimation of the potential capacity for peak time DR. Other literature related to load forecasting is the work of Liu et al. [ 63 ] where they predict the consumption&#x27;s reduction of users under different incentives in DR, and the paper of Akhavan-Rezai et al. [ 190 ] where a prediction model of the future car arrivals is employed as part of a wider EMS for incorporating aggregated plug-in EVs in future smart parking lots. Future car arrivals translate to potential load which is going to be available for providing real-time pricing DR services. Show more View article Read full article URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136403212030191X Journal 2020 , Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Ioannis Antonopoulos , ... Steve Wattam Chapter ENERGY DEMAND ANALYSIS AND FORECASTING, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983, . 1990 , Energy Analysis and Policy Mohan Munasinghe 8.10 Summary We may conclude that it is important to avoid errors in demand projections because they often lead to shortages of energy which may have serious repercussions on economic growth and development. The methodologies for demand forecasting include, historical trend analysis, sector-specific econometric multiple correlation methods, macroeconomic or input-output methods, and empirical surveys. In general, the relatively sophisticated econometric and input-output approaches are easier to apply in the developed countries, while data and manpower constraints indicate that the simpler techniques will be more effective in the developing countries. There is no universally superior method of demand forecasting, and the use of several different methods is recommended to cross-check the final result. In this chapter, we have discussed the problems of verifying patterns of energy consumption. Price subsidies and anomalies in the availability of energy products lead to leakages and use of fuels in unexpected and undesirable activities. The energy use patterns for traditional fuels are difficult to determine and project, because well-established markets do not exist for these products. This chapter also contains a detailed description of the determinants of demand in the various energy subsectors including: electric power, natural gas, coal, petroleum products, and traditional fuels and nonconventional sources. Show more View chapter Explore book Read full chapter URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780408056342500183 Book 1990 , Energy Analysis and Policy Mohan Munasinghe Chapter Energy demand forecasting 2020 , Energy for Sustainable Development M.A. Islam , ... N.A. Rahim 5.4 Forecasting process A typical energy demand forecasting process is shown in Fig. 5.2 . The forecasting procedure commonly starts from the energy database, which is essentially historical data that are reliable and accessible. This database should include the energy demand data as well as other variables that can affect the energy consumption. The data is used as the inputs for a forecast model, whose output will be the forecasted energy demand. This is usually a continuous process, where new data will be added to refresh the database and new forecast is made as time progress. Figure 5.2 . Forecasting method ( Schellong, 2011 ). There is a good variety of demand forecasting methods available in the literature. Regardless of the approach, following basic steps are usually required: • Setting the scope of the forecasted variable(s) : It is necessary to first decide the scope of the forecasted variable(s). This includes: the detailed items to be forecasted, the units of the variable(s) as well as the forecasting horizon ( Reid &amp; Sanders, 2011 ). In general, this step tries to answer the What, Where and When questions. What— For instance, energy demand forecast can be done either for overall energy consumption of for specific energy sources (oil, gas, electricity, etc.). Where— The physical/geographical boundary of the variable should also be decided here. For example, the forecasted energy demand can be considered for a building, a district, a country, a region or even the world. When —Finally the forecast horizon, i.e., short-, medium- or long-term, should be decided to serve the purpose of the forecast. • Evaluating the data: Once the scope of forecast is decided, it is then necessary to evaluate the data for determine what data is required and if these data is available. The required data and its availability will determine the methodology and accuracy of the forecast accuracy. • Select a forecasting model: With the data evaluation done, a suitable forecasting model needs to be selected next. The choice of model is usually tradeoffs between accuracy, complexity, availability of data as well as cost. More discussions on the commonly forecasting models will be given in the subsequent sections of this chapter. • Perform forecasting: With the database and forecasting model ready, this step basically involves inputting the data into the model to get the forecasted results. • Monitor forecast accuracy: Demand forecasting is usually a continuing process; though one-off forecast is also used for one-off projects. As discussed earlier, the accuracy of the forecasted demand can be affected by unpredicted socioeconomical and environmental factors. To continuously improve the forecast, it is required to monitor the forecast accuracy and make corresponding adjustments to the database and/or model. Show more View chapter Explore book Read full chapter URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128146453000055 Book 2020 , Energy for Sustainable Development M.A. Islam , ... N.A. Rahim Related terms: Artificial Neural Network Energy Engineering Genetic Algorithm Natural Gas Deep Learning Artificial Intelligence Smart Grid Particle Swarm Optimization Renewable Energy Moving Average View all Topics Recommended publications Info icon Energy Journal Expert Systems with Applications Journal Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews Journal Journal of Cleaner Production Journal Browse books and journals About ScienceDirect Remote access Contact and support Terms and conditions Privacy policy Cookie settings All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.